spring-cloud-skipper/README.adoc, before:

image:https://codecov.io/gh/spring-cloud/spring-cloud-skipper/branch/master/graph/badge.svg["Codecov", link="https://codecov.io/gh/spring-cloud/spring-cloud-skipper/branch/master"]

== Spring Cloud Skipper image:https://build.spring.io/plugins/servlet/wittified/build-status/SCSKIP-BMASTER[Build Status, link=https://build.spring.io/browse/SCSKIP]

== Spring Cloud Skipper

A package manager that installs, upgrades, and rolls back applications on multiple Cloud Platforms.

Supported application types are Spring Boot applications.

Supported Cloud Platforms are `Cloud Foundry`, `Kubernetes`.

For development experience, `Local` deployment is supported.

Skipper can be used as part of implementing the practice of Continuous Deployment.  It provides a versioned "single
source of truth" that defines what applications were deployed to the cloud.  This enables easy rollbacks and upgrades without having to rebuild applications from source code.

=== Building

Clone the repo and type

----
$ ./mvnw clean install
----

which will run the tests as well.

To just create the executables, type

----
$./mvnw clean package -DskipTests -Dmaven.javadoc.skip=true
----

To generate just the RESTDocs documentation

----
./mvnw test -pl spring-cloud-skipper-server-core -Dtest=*Documentation*
----

To build just the documentation, if the RESTDocs generated from tests are already present

----
./mvnw -DskipTests -Pfull package -pl spring-cloud-skipper-docs
----


=== Quick Tour

There are some sample packages in the test directory that you can use to get started.  Create a `skipper.yml` file in your home directory

```
spring:
  cloud:
    skipper:
      server:
        packageRepositories:
          -
            name: test
            url: "file:///home/mpollack/projects/spring-cloud-skipper/spring-cloud-skipper-server-core/src/test/resources/repositories/binaries/test/"
```

Where you replace `/home/mpollack/projects/` to the path where you cloned `spring-cloud-skipper`.

Then start the Skipper server

----
$ java -jar spring-cloud-skipper-server/target/spring-cloud-skipper-server-1.0.0.BUILD-SNAPSHOT.jar --spring.config.additional-location=/home/mpollack/skipper.yml
----

Where you replace `/home/mpollack/` with your own home directory.

Then launch the Skipper shell in another terminal

----
$ java -jar spring-cloud-skipper-shell/target/spring-cloud-skipper-shell-1.0.0.BUILD-SNAPSHOT.jar
----

The command `package search` will search for all available packages. It should then show you the following output

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>package search
╔═════════════════╤═══════╤═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║      Name       │Version│                         Description                         ║
╠═════════════════╪═══════╪═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╣
║helloworld-docker│1.0.0  │The hello world app says hello.                              ║
║log              │1.1.0  │The log sink uses the application logger to output the data  ║
║                 │       │for inspection.                                              ║
║log              │2.0.0  │The log sink uses the application logger to output the data  ║
║                 │       │for inspection.                                              ║
║log              │1.0.0  │The log sink uses the application logger to output the data  ║
║                 │       │for inspection.                                              ║
║log-docker       │1.0.0  │Docker version of the log sink application version           ║
║log-docker       │2.0.0  │Docker version of the log sink application                   ║
║ticktock         │1.0.0  │The ticktock stream sends a time stamp and logs the value.   ║
║time             │2.0.0  │The time source periodically emits a timestamp string.       ║
╚═════════════════╧═══════╧═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
----

In another window you can run `watch -n 2 jps` so see which Java processes are running, since by default, the local deployer will be used to deploy packages.

Now deploy the log 1.0.0 package.

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>package install --package-name log --package-version 1.0.0 --release-name mylog
Released mylog. Now at version v1.
----

Note that the log 1.0.0 package deploys the version 1.2.0.RC1 of the application.  You should see the java app named `log-sink-rabbit-1.2.0.RC1.jar` running in the output of the `jps` command

You can ask for the status using the status command

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release status --release-name mylog
╔═══════════════╤═════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║Last Deployed  │Fri Oct 27 15:44:00 IST 2017                     ║
║Status         │DEPLOYED                                         ║
║Platform Status│All applications have been successfully deployed.║
║               │[mylog.log-v1], State = [mylog.log-v1-0=deployed]║
╚═══════════════╧═════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
----

The manifest for this release that represents the file instructions to deploy onto the platform, can be shown using the `get manifest` command.

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>manifest get --release-name mylog

---
# Source: log.yml
apiVersion: skipper/v1
kind: SpringBootApp
metadata:
  name: log
  count: 1
  type: sink
spec:
  resource: maven://org.springframework.cloud.stream.app:log-sink-rabbit:1.2.0.RC1
  resourceMetadata: maven://org.springframework.cloud.stream.app:log-sink-rabbit:jar:metadata:1.2.0.RC1
  applicationProperties:
  deploymentProperties:
----

Now update the release with a newer version

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release upgrade --release-name mylog --package-name log --package-version 2.0.0
mylog has been upgraded.  Now at version v2.
----

You should see the java app named `log-sink-rabbit-5.0.0.jar` running in the output of the `jps` command.

The status command should shortly show it has been deployed successfully.  Note you can type `!status` to execute the last command that started with the word `status`

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release status --release-name mylog
╔═══════════════╤═════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║Last Deployed  │Fri Oct 27 15:45:43 IST 2017                     ║
║Status         │DEPLOYED                                         ║
║Platform Status│All applications have been successfully deployed.║
║               │[mylog.log-v2], State = [mylog.log-v2-0=deployed]║
╚═══════════════╧═════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
----

Next rollback to the previous release

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release rollback --release-name mylog
mylog has been rolled back.  Now at version v3.
----

You should see the java app named `log-sink-rabbit-1.2.0.RC1.jar` running in the output of the `jps` command

The status command should shortly show it has been deployed successfully.

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release status --release-name mylog
╔═══════════════╤═════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║Last Deployed  │Fri Oct 27 15:48:03 IST 2017                     ║
║Status         │DEPLOYED                                         ║
║Platform Status│All applications have been successfully deployed.║
║               │[mylog.log-v3], State = [mylog.log-v3-0=deployed]║
╚═══════════════╧═════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
----

The `history` command shows you the various releases that were made

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release history --release-name mylog
╔═══════╤════════════════════════════╤════════╤════════════╤═══════════════╤════════════════╗
║Version│        Last updated        │ Status │Package Name│Package Version│  Description   ║
╠═══════╪════════════════════════════╪════════╪════════════╪═══════════════╪════════════════╣
║3      │Fri Oct 27 15:48:03 IST 2017│DEPLOYED│log         │1.0.0          │Upgrade complete║
║2      │Fri Oct 27 15:45:43 IST 2017│DELETED │log         │2.0.0          │Delete complete ║
║1      │Fri Oct 27 15:44:00 IST 2017│DELETED │log         │1.0.0          │Delete complete ║
╚═══════╧════════════════════════════╧════════╧════════════╧═══════════════╧════════════════╝
----

Now delete the release.


[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release delete --release-name mylog
mylog has been deleted.
----

You should not see any `log-sink-rabbit` apps in the `jps` command.


=== Code formatting guidelines

* The directory ./etc/eclipse has two files for use with code formatting, `eclipse-code-formatter.xml` for the majority of the code formatting rules and `eclipse.importorder` to order the import statements.

* In eclipse you import these files by navigating `Windows -> Preferences` and then the menu items `Preferences > Java > Code Style > Formatter` and `Preferences > Java > Code Style > Organize Imports` respectfully.

* In `IntelliJ`, install the plugin `Eclipse Code Formatter`.  You can find it by searching the "Browse Repositories" under the plugin option within `IntelliJ` (Once installed you will need to reboot Intellij for it to take effect).
Then navigate to `Intellij IDEA > Preferences` and select the Eclipse Code Formatter.  Select the `eclipse-code-formatter.xml` file for the field `Eclipse Java Formatter config file` and the file `eclipse.importorder` for the field `Import order`.
Enable the `Eclipse code formatter` by clicking `Use the Eclipse code formatter` then click the *OK* button.
** NOTE: If you configure the `Eclipse Code Formatter` from `File > Other Settings > Default Settings` it will set this policy across all of your Intellij projects.

Commit message:

Remove Maven profile full in favour of using docs for both Javadocs and other document generation.

spring-cloud-skipper/README.adoc, after:

image:https://codecov.io/gh/spring-cloud/spring-cloud-skipper/branch/master/graph/badge.svg["Codecov", link="https://codecov.io/gh/spring-cloud/spring-cloud-skipper/branch/master"]

== Spring Cloud Skipper image:https://build.spring.io/plugins/servlet/wittified/build-status/SCSKIP-BMASTER[Build Status, link=https://build.spring.io/browse/SCSKIP]

== Spring Cloud Skipper

A package manager that installs, upgrades, and rolls back applications on multiple Cloud Platforms.

Supported application types are Spring Boot applications.

Supported Cloud Platforms are `Cloud Foundry`, `Kubernetes`.

For development experience, `Local` deployment is supported.

Skipper can be used as part of implementing the practice of Continuous Deployment.  It provides a versioned "single
source of truth" that defines what applications were deployed to the cloud.  This enables easy rollbacks and upgrades without having to rebuild applications from source code.

=== Building

Clone the repo and type

----
$ ./mvnw clean install
----

which will run the tests as well.

To just create the executables, type

----
$./mvnw clean package -DskipTests -Dmaven.javadoc.skip=true
----

To generate just the Javadocs and RESTDocs documentation.
----
# from root of spring-cloud-dataflow
./mvnw package -Pdocs -DskipTests -f ./spring-cloud-skipper
# from ./spring-cloud-skipper
./mvnw package -Pdocs -DskipTests
----

=== Quick Tour

There are some sample packages in the test directory that you can use to get started.  Create a `skipper.yml` file in your home directory

```
spring:
  cloud:
    skipper:
      server:
        packageRepositories:
          -
            name: test
            url: "file:///home/mpollack/projects/spring-cloud-skipper/spring-cloud-skipper-server-core/src/test/resources/repositories/binaries/test/"
```

Where you replace `/home/mpollack/projects/` to the path where you cloned `spring-cloud-skipper`.

Then start the Skipper server

----
$ java -jar spring-cloud-skipper-server/target/spring-cloud-skipper-server-1.0.0.BUILD-SNAPSHOT.jar --spring.config.additional-location=/home/mpollack/skipper.yml
----

Where you replace `/home/mpollack/` with your own home directory.

Then launch the Skipper shell in another terminal

----
$ java -jar spring-cloud-skipper-shell/target/spring-cloud-skipper-shell-1.0.0.BUILD-SNAPSHOT.jar
----

The command `package search` will search for all available packages. It should then show you the following output

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>package search
╔═════════════════╤═══════╤═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║      Name       │Version│                         Description                         ║
╠═════════════════╪═══════╪═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╣
║helloworld-docker│1.0.0  │The hello world app says hello.                              ║
║log              │1.1.0  │The log sink uses the application logger to output the data  ║
║                 │       │for inspection.                                              ║
║log              │2.0.0  │The log sink uses the application logger to output the data  ║
║                 │       │for inspection.                                              ║
║log              │1.0.0  │The log sink uses the application logger to output the data  ║
║                 │       │for inspection.                                              ║
║log-docker       │1.0.0  │Docker version of the log sink application version           ║
║log-docker       │2.0.0  │Docker version of the log sink application                   ║
║ticktock         │1.0.0  │The ticktock stream sends a time stamp and logs the value.   ║
║time             │2.0.0  │The time source periodically emits a timestamp string.       ║
╚═════════════════╧═══════╧═════════════════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
----

In another window you can run `watch -n 2 jps` so see which Java processes are running, since by default, the local deployer will be used to deploy packages.

Now deploy the log 1.0.0 package.

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>package install --package-name log --package-version 1.0.0 --release-name mylog
Released mylog. Now at version v1.
----

Note that the log 1.0.0 package deploys the version 1.2.0.RC1 of the application.  You should see the java app named `log-sink-rabbit-1.2.0.RC1.jar` running in the output of the `jps` command

You can ask for the status using the status command

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release status --release-name mylog
╔═══════════════╤═════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║Last Deployed  │Fri Oct 27 15:44:00 IST 2017                     ║
║Status         │DEPLOYED                                         ║
║Platform Status│All applications have been successfully deployed.║
║               │[mylog.log-v1], State = [mylog.log-v1-0=deployed]║
╚═══════════════╧═════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
----

The manifest for this release that represents the file instructions to deploy onto the platform, can be shown using the `get manifest` command.

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>manifest get --release-name mylog

---
# Source: log.yml
apiVersion: skipper/v1
kind: SpringBootApp
metadata:
  name: log
  count: 1
  type: sink
spec:
  resource: maven://org.springframework.cloud.stream.app:log-sink-rabbit:1.2.0.RC1
  resourceMetadata: maven://org.springframework.cloud.stream.app:log-sink-rabbit:jar:metadata:1.2.0.RC1
  applicationProperties:
  deploymentProperties:
----

Now update the release with a newer version

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release upgrade --release-name mylog --package-name log --package-version 2.0.0
mylog has been upgraded.  Now at version v2.
----

You should see the java app named `log-sink-rabbit-5.0.0.jar` running in the output of the `jps` command.

The status command should shortly show it has been deployed successfully.  Note you can type `!status` to execute the last command that started with the word `status`

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release status --release-name mylog
╔═══════════════╤═════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║Last Deployed  │Fri Oct 27 15:45:43 IST 2017                     ║
║Status         │DEPLOYED                                         ║
║Platform Status│All applications have been successfully deployed.║
║               │[mylog.log-v2], State = [mylog.log-v2-0=deployed]║
╚═══════════════╧═════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
----

Next rollback to the previous release

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release rollback --release-name mylog
mylog has been rolled back.  Now at version v3.
----

You should see the java app named `log-sink-rabbit-1.2.0.RC1.jar` running in the output of the `jps` command

The status command should shortly show it has been deployed successfully.

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release status --release-name mylog
╔═══════════════╤═════════════════════════════════════════════════╗
║Last Deployed  │Fri Oct 27 15:48:03 IST 2017                     ║
║Status         │DEPLOYED                                         ║
║Platform Status│All applications have been successfully deployed.║
║               │[mylog.log-v3], State = [mylog.log-v3-0=deployed]║
╚═══════════════╧═════════════════════════════════════════════════╝
----

The `history` command shows you the various releases that were made

[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release history --release-name mylog
╔═══════╤════════════════════════════╤════════╤════════════╤═══════════════╤════════════════╗
║Version│        Last updated        │ Status │Package Name│Package Version│  Description   ║
╠═══════╪════════════════════════════╪════════╪════════════╪═══════════════╪════════════════╣
║3      │Fri Oct 27 15:48:03 IST 2017│DEPLOYED│log         │1.0.0          │Upgrade complete║
║2      │Fri Oct 27 15:45:43 IST 2017│DELETED │log         │2.0.0          │Delete complete ║
║1      │Fri Oct 27 15:44:00 IST 2017│DELETED │log         │1.0.0          │Delete complete ║
╚═══════╧════════════════════════════╧════════╧════════════╧═══════════════╧════════════════╝
----

Now delete the release.


[source,bash,options="nowrap"]
----
skipper:>release delete --release-name mylog
mylog has been deleted.
----

You should not see any `log-sink-rabbit` apps in the `jps` command.


=== Code formatting guidelines

* The directory ./etc/eclipse has two files for use with code formatting, `eclipse-code-formatter.xml` for the majority of the code formatting rules and `eclipse.importorder` to order the import statements.

* In eclipse you import these files by navigating `Windows -> Preferences` and then the menu items `Preferences > Java > Code Style > Formatter` and `Preferences > Java > Code Style > Organize Imports` respectfully.

* In `IntelliJ`, install the plugin `Eclipse Code Formatter`.  You can find it by searching the "Browse Repositories" under the plugin option within `IntelliJ` (Once installed you will need to reboot Intellij for it to take effect).
Then navigate to `Intellij IDEA > Preferences` and select the Eclipse Code Formatter.  Select the `eclipse-code-formatter.xml` file for the field `Eclipse Java Formatter config file` and the file `eclipse.importorder` for the field `Import order`.
Enable the `Eclipse code formatter` by clicking `Use the Eclipse code formatter` then click the *OK* button.
** NOTE: If you configure the `Eclipse Code Formatter` from `File > Other Settings > Default Settings` it will set this policy across all of your Intellij projects.
