spring-cloud-dataflow-docs/src/main/asciidoc/configuration-carvel.adoc, before:

[[configuration-carvel]]
== Deployment using Carvel

Deployment of a carvel package requires the installation of tools and specific Kubernetes controllers. Then you will add the package repository to the cluster and install the application.

For local minikube or kind cluster you can use: xref:local-k8s-development[Configure Kubernetes for local development or testing], and follow the instructions until the section _Deploy Spring Cloud Data Flow_

=== Required Tools

* `kubectl` - Kubernetes CLI (Install with `brew install kubectl`)
* `carvel` - Packaging and Deployment tools

Carvel CLI can be installed using:

[source,shell]
....
wget -O- https://carvel.dev/install.sh | bash
# or with curl...
curl -L https://carvel.dev/install.sh | bash
....

Alternative following the instructions at the bottom of the home page at link:https://carvel.dev/[carvel.dev]

The following tools are use by the scripts.

* `jq` - lightweight JSON parser
* `yq` - lightweight YAML parser
* `wget` - Invoke http requests.
* `dirname` provides the directory part of a filename.
* `readlink` provides absolute path of a relative link.

NOTE: Some of these utilities are not installed in macOS or *nix by default but will be available from MacPorts or HomeBrew.

=== Scripts

These scripts assume you are connected to a Kubernetes cluster and `kubectl` is available.

[cols="3m,3,6a"]
|===
|Name | Arguments |Descriptions

| start-deploy.sh
| <broker> [scdf-type] [namespace] [release\|snapshot]
| Configures environmental variables needs for the rest of the scripts. `BROKER`, `NS` and `SCDF_TYPE` are set. The default `NS` is `scdf`. The namespace will be created if it doesn't exist by `setup-scdf-repo.sh`. The default `SCDF_TYPE` is `oss`. _release\|snapshot_ and _scdf-type_ will determine the value of `PACKAGE_VERSION` set.

| prepare-cluster.sh
| N/A
| Installs cert-manager, secretgen-controller and kapp-controller

| carvel-use-template.sh
| [scdf-type] (oss, pro)
| Creates `scdf-values.yml` in current directory based on `scdf-pro-values.yml` or `scdf-oss-values.yml`

| carvel-import-secret.sh
| <secret-name> <namespace> [secret-namespace] [--import|--placeholder]
| [--placeholder] Creates place holder secret in namespace. [--import] Creates `SecretImport` for secretgen-controller.

| setup-scdf-repo.sh
| [scdf-type] (oss, pro)
| Creates the namespace and installs the relevant Carvel package and credentials. If the optional _scdf-type_ is not provided the environmental variable `SCDF_TYPE` will be used.

| configure-prometheus-proxy.sh
| <host> <port> [step]
| Configures Spring Boot Actuator properties for Data Flow, Skipper, Streams and Tasks. Default `step` is 10s

| configure-database.sh
| <app> <database> <url> <username/secret-name>  [password/secret-username-key] [secret-password-key]
| If only _secret-name_ is provided then _secret-username-key_ defaults to `username` and _secret-password-key_ defaults to `password`.

The following 3 combinations are allowed after the _url_:

* <secret-name>
* <secret-name> <username-key>
<password-key>
* <username> <password>

| deploy-scdf.sh
| [app-name]
| Deploys the application using the package and `scdf-values.yml` in the current directory.
The default _app-name_ is `scdf-${SCDF_TYPE}`.

| update-scdf.sh
| [app-name]
| Updated the deployed application using a modified values file.
The default _app-name_ is `scdf-${SCDF_TYPE}`.

| export-dataflow-ip.sh
| N/A
| Will print the URL to access dataflow. If you use `source ./export-dataflow-ip.sh` it will export `DATAFLOW_URL` to be used by `register-apps.sh`

| register-apps.sh
| <broker> [stream-application-version]
| _broker_ must be one of rabbit or kafka.
_stream-application-version_ is optional and will install the latest version. The latest version is 2021.1.2
|===

NOTE: Take note that the registration of application in the _pro_ version can take a few minutes since it retrieves all version information and metadata upfront.

=== Preparation
You will need to prepare a values file named scdf-values.yml
The following steps will provide help.

==== Prepare Configuration parameters

Executing the following script will configure the environmental variables needed.

[source,shell]
....
source ./carvel/start-deploy.sh <broker> <namespace> [scdf-type] [release|snapshot]
....

Where:

* `broker` is one of rabbitmq or kafka
* `namespace` A valid Kubernetes namespace other than `default`
* `scdf-type` One of oss or pro. oss is the default.
* `release|snapshot` and `scdf-type` will determine the value of `PACKAGE_VERSION`.

_*The best option to ensure using the type and version of package intended is to modify `deploy/versions.yaml`*_

The environmental variables can also be configured manually to override the values.

[cols="3m,6,2"]
|===
|Name |Description|Default

|PACKAGE_VERSION
|Version of Carvel package.
| Release version

|DATAFLOW_VERSION
|Version of Spring Cloud Data Flow
|2.11.2

|DATAFLOW_PRO_VERSION
|Version of Spring Cloud Data Flow Pro
|1.6.1

|SKIPPER_VERSION
|Version of Spring Cloud Skipper
|2.11.2

|REGISTRY
|Url and repository of package registry. Format `<private-registry-host/repo-name>`. This will be used to prefix the carvel repo and package.
| `docker.io/springcloud`

| BROKER
| One of `kafka` or `rabbitmq`
| `rabbitmq`

| DATABASE
| One of `mariadb` or `postgresql`. The default is `postgresql`. This will only apply when you `deploy-local-database.sh`
|`postgresql`

| NS
| A Kubernetes namespace other than `default`.
| `scdf`

| SCDF_TYPE
| One of `oss` or `pro`.
| `oss`

|===

NOTE: The above environmental variables should only be provided if different from the default in `deploy/versions.yaml`

==== Prepare Configuration file

Create a file name `scdf-values.yml` by executing:

[source,shell]
....
./carvel/carvel-use-template.sh
....

Edit the file as needed to configure the deployment. The `deploy-local-` scripts will

_Uses scdf-type previously selected._

=== Prepare cluster and add repository

Login to docker and optionally registry.tanzu.vmware.com for Spring Cloud Data Flow Pro.

[source,shell]
....
# When deploying SCDF Pro.
export TANZU_DOCKER_USERNAME="<tanzu-net-username>"
export TANZU_DOCKER_PASSWORD="<tanzu-net-password>"
docker login --username $TANZU_DOCKER_USERNAME --password $TANZU_DOCKER_PASSWORD registry.packages.broadcom.com

# Always required to ensure you don't experience rate limiting with Docker HUB
export DOCKER_HUB_USERNAME="<docker-hub-username>"
export DOCKER_HUB_PASSWORD="<docker-hub-password>"
docker login --username $DOCKER_HUB_USERNAME --password $DOCKER_HUB_PASSWORD index.docker.io
....

Install carvel kapp-controller, secretgen-controller and certmanager

[source,shell]
....
./carvel/prepare-cluster.sh
....

Load scdf repo package for the _scdf-type_
[source,shell]
....
./carvel/setup-scdf-repo.sh
....

=== Install supporting services

In a production environment you should be using supported database and broker services or operators along with shared observability tools.

For local development or demonstration the following can be used to install database, broker and prometheus.

==== Deploy local database.

[source,shell]
....
./carvel/deploy-local-database.sh <database>  # <1>
....
<1> `database` must be one of `postgresql` or `mariadb`. Default is postgresql or configure in `DATABASE` using `start-deploy.sh`.

NOTE: This script updates `scdf-values.yml` with the correct secret name.

==== Deploy local message broker.
[source,shell]
....
./carvel/deploy-local-broker.sh
....

==== Deploy local Prometheus and proxy.
[source,shell]
....
./carvel/deploy-local-prometheus.sh
....

_This script also configures the Grafana endpoint in `scdf-values.yml`_

=== Configure Prometheus proxy

In the case where and existing prometheus and prometheus proxy is deployed the proxy can be configured using:

[source,shell]
....
./carvel/configure-prometheus-proxy.sh <host> <port> [step]
....

=== Deploy Spring Cloud Data Flow

[source,shell]
....
./carvel/deploy-scdf.sh
source ./carvel/export-dataflow-ip.sh
# expected output: Dataflow URL: <url-to-access-dataflow>
./carvel/register-apps.sh
....

=== Update deployed application.

You can modify the values file used during installation and then update the deployment using `./carvel/update-scdf.sh`

Commit message:

[CI] Update docs for load-image and register-apps.sh for separation of Stream Apps Release Train and Version. [skip ci]

spring-cloud-dataflow-docs/src/main/asciidoc/configuration-carvel.adoc, after:

[[configuration-carvel]]
== Deployment using Carvel

Deployment of a carvel package requires the installation of tools and specific Kubernetes controllers. Then you will add the package repository to the cluster and install the application.

For local minikube or kind cluster you can use: xref:local-k8s-development[Configure Kubernetes for local development or testing], and follow the instructions until the section _Deploy Spring Cloud Data Flow_

=== Required Tools

* `kubectl` - Kubernetes CLI (Install with `brew install kubectl`)
* `carvel` - Packaging and Deployment tools

Carvel CLI can be installed using:

[source,shell]
....
wget -O- https://carvel.dev/install.sh | bash
# or with curl...
curl -L https://carvel.dev/install.sh | bash
....

Alternative following the instructions at the bottom of the home page at link:https://carvel.dev/[carvel.dev]

The following tools are use by the scripts.

* `jq` - lightweight JSON parser
* `yq` - lightweight YAML parser
* `wget` - Invoke http requests.
* `dirname` provides the directory part of a filename.
* `readlink` provides absolute path of a relative link.

NOTE: Some of these utilities are not installed in macOS or *nix by default but will be available from MacPorts or HomeBrew.

=== Scripts

These scripts assume you are connected to a Kubernetes cluster and `kubectl` is available.

[cols="3m,3,6a"]
|===
|Name | Arguments |Descriptions

| start-deploy.sh
| <broker> [scdf-type] [namespace] [release\|snapshot]
| Configures environmental variables needs for the rest of the scripts. `BROKER`, `NS` and `SCDF_TYPE` are set. The default `NS` is `scdf`. The namespace will be created if it doesn't exist by `setup-scdf-repo.sh`. The default `SCDF_TYPE` is `oss`. _release\|snapshot_ and _scdf-type_ will determine the value of `PACKAGE_VERSION` set.

| prepare-cluster.sh
| N/A
| Installs cert-manager, secretgen-controller and kapp-controller

| carvel-use-template.sh
| [scdf-type] (oss, pro)
| Creates `scdf-values.yml` in current directory based on `scdf-pro-values.yml` or `scdf-oss-values.yml`

| carvel-import-secret.sh
| <secret-name> <namespace> [secret-namespace] [--import\|--placeholder]
| Creates an import secret, placeholder or import using secretgen-controller.
| setup-scdf-repo.sh
| [scdf-type] (oss, pro)
| Creates the namespace and installs the relevant Carvel package and credentials. If the optional _scdf-type_ is not provided the environmental variable `SCDF_TYPE` will be used.

| configure-prometheus-proxy.sh
| <host> <port> [step]
| Configures Spring Boot Actuator properties for Data Flow, Skipper, Streams and Tasks. Default `step` is 10s

| configure-database.sh
| <app> <database> <url> <username/secret-name>  [password/secret-username-key] [secret-password-key]
| If only _secret-name_ is provided then _secret-username-key_ defaults to `username` and _secret-password-key_ defaults to `password`.

The following 3 combinations are allowed after the _url_:

* <secret-name>
* <secret-name> <username-key>
<password-key>
* <username> <password>

| deploy-scdf.sh
| [app-name]
| Deploys the application using the package and `scdf-values.yml` in the current directory.
The default _app-name_ is `scdf-${SCDF_TYPE}`.

| update-scdf.sh
| [app-name]
| Updated the deployed application using a modified values file.
The default _app-name_ is `scdf-${SCDF_TYPE}`.

| export-dataflow-ip.sh
| N/A
| Will print the URL to access dataflow. If you use `source ./export-dataflow-ip.sh` it will export `DATAFLOW_URL` to be used by `register-apps.sh`

| register-apps.sh
| <broker> [stream-application-version]
| _broker_ must be one of rabbit or kafka.
_stream-application-version_ is optional and will install the latest version. The latest version is 2021.1.2

|===

NOTE: Take note that the registration of application in the _pro_ version can take a few minutes since it retrieves all version information and metadata upfront.

=== Preparation
You will need to prepare a values file named scdf-values.yml
The following steps will provide help.

==== Prepare Configuration parameters

Executing the following script will configure the environmental variables needed.

[source,shell]
....
source ./carvel/start-deploy.sh <broker> <namespace> [scdf-type] [release|snapshot]
....

Where:

* `broker` is one of rabbitmq or kafka
* `namespace` A valid Kubernetes namespace other than `default`
* `scdf-type` One of oss or pro. oss is the default.
* `release|snapshot` and `scdf-type` will determine the value of `PACKAGE_VERSION`.

_*The best option to ensure using the type and version of package intended is to modify `deploy/versions.yaml`*_

The environmental variables can also be configured manually to override the values.

[cols="3m,6,2"]
|===
|Name |Description|Default

|PACKAGE_VERSION
|Version of Carvel package.
| Release version

|DATAFLOW_VERSION
|Version of Spring Cloud Data Flow
|2.11.2

|DATAFLOW_PRO_VERSION
|Version of Spring Cloud Data Flow Pro
|1.6.1

|SKIPPER_VERSION
|Version of Spring Cloud Skipper
|2.11.2

|REGISTRY
|Url and repository of package registry. Format `<private-registry-host/repo-name>`. This will be used to prefix the carvel repo and package.
| `docker.io/springcloud`

| BROKER
| One of `kafka` or `rabbitmq`
| `rabbitmq`

| DATABASE
| One of `mariadb` or `postgresql`. The default is `postgresql`. This will only apply when you `deploy-local-database.sh`
|`postgresql`

| NS
| A Kubernetes namespace other than `default`.
| `scdf`

| SCDF_TYPE
| One of `oss` or `pro`.
| `oss`

|===

NOTE: The above environmental variables should only be provided if different from the default in `deploy/versions.yaml`

==== Prepare Configuration file

Create a file name `scdf-values.yml` by executing:

[source,shell]
....
./carvel/carvel-use-template.sh
....

Edit the file as needed to configure the deployment. The `deploy-local-` scripts will

_Uses scdf-type previously selected._

=== Prepare cluster and add repository

Login to docker and optionally registry.tanzu.vmware.com for Spring Cloud Data Flow Pro.

[source,shell]
....
# When deploying SCDF Pro.
export TANZU_DOCKER_USERNAME="<tanzu-net-username>"
export TANZU_DOCKER_PASSWORD="<tanzu-net-password>"
docker login --username $TANZU_DOCKER_USERNAME --password $TANZU_DOCKER_PASSWORD registry.packages.broadcom.com

# Always required to ensure you don't experience rate limiting with Docker HUB
export DOCKER_HUB_USERNAME="<docker-hub-username>"
export DOCKER_HUB_PASSWORD="<docker-hub-password>"
docker login --username $DOCKER_HUB_USERNAME --password $DOCKER_HUB_PASSWORD index.docker.io
....

Install carvel kapp-controller, secretgen-controller and certmanager

[source,shell]
....
./carvel/prepare-cluster.sh
....

Load scdf repo package for the _scdf-type_
[source,shell]
....
./carvel/setup-scdf-repo.sh
....

=== Install supporting services

In a production environment you should be using supported database and broker services or operators along with shared observability tools.

For local development or demonstration the following can be used to install database, broker and prometheus.

==== Deploy local database.

[source,shell]
....
./carvel/deploy-local-database.sh <database>  # <1>
....
<1> `database` must be one of `postgresql` or `mariadb`. Default is postgresql or configure in `DATABASE` using `start-deploy.sh`.

NOTE: This script updates `scdf-values.yml` with the correct secret name.

==== Deploy local message broker.
[source,shell]
....
./carvel/deploy-local-broker.sh
....

==== Deploy local Prometheus and proxy.
[source,shell]
....
./carvel/deploy-local-prometheus.sh
....

_This script also configures the Grafana endpoint in `scdf-values.yml`_

=== Configure Prometheus proxy

In the case where and existing prometheus and prometheus proxy is deployed the proxy can be configured using:

[source,shell]
....
./carvel/configure-prometheus-proxy.sh <host> <port> [step]
....

=== Deploy Spring Cloud Data Flow

You can configure the before `register-apps.sh`:

* `STREAM_APPS_RT_VERSION` Stream Apps Release Train Version. _Default is 2022.0.0_.
* `STREAM_APPS_VERSION` Stream Apps Version. _Default is 4.0.0_.

[source,shell]
....
./carvel/deploy-scdf.sh
source ./carvel/export-dataflow-ip.sh
# expected output: Dataflow URL: <url-to-access-dataflow>
./carvel/register-apps.sh
....

=== Update deployed application.

You can modify the values file used during installation and then update the deployment using `./carvel/update-scdf.sh`
